# Virtual 8086 Mode

OS/90 can make calls to DOS, BIOS, and 16-bit drivers using the INT interface, and permits drivers to capture requests to 16-bit software and implement feature in a concurrent 32-bit environment.
SV86 is a non-preemptible context in which virtual 8086 mode is given special privileges to run as if it were true real mode. IO instructions execute directly and INT/IRET are emulated differently. It can recursively execute a virtual INT as with INTxH, and hooks apply each time.

This has NOTHING to do with multitasking DOS programs and how they handle INT calls. The DOS subsystem, and any subsystem for that matter, has the full authority to decide if it will handle a ring-3 system entry by calling V86. This is a driver-level interface that allows for the reimplementation of real mode software in protected mode.

> Anything done in 32-bit mode will automatically perform better than 16-bit mode. SV86 has to switch to ring-0, to ring-3 V86, back to ring-0, and finally, back to the ring-3 caller. It also has to copy register parameters one more time for the V86 entry.

Listing:
- VOID V_INTxH(BYTE vector, PSTDREGS regs)
- VOID V_HookINTxH(BYTE vector, V86HND hnew, V86HND *out_prev)

## V86HND

This function pointer type returns itself, or at least a type compatible with itself. It takes a PSTDREGS.
CONTEXT: May be T012 upon invokation.

## V_HookINTxH

Changes the current SV86 handler for that vector and outputs it to [out_prev]. To chain properly, the new handler must call the one it replaced.
Hooks should be applied when the driver is starting up to whatever vector it needs to control. It is not recommended to do this during runtime. V86 handlers also cannot be modified within a V86HND procedure.

The general procedure of a hook procedure is to check the appropriate registers to figure out if the driver has jurisdiction over this INT call; return the next handler address to pass to previous hook, return `(PVOID)(1)` to automatically reflect to real mode (not recommended) or return NULL to consume the INT and finish.

The correct segment register set to use is the one with v86 prefixes, though it would not have mattered. Simply using the name without anything else will work too.

> Never call this from inside a V86 handler.

## V_INTxH

This is the general purpose V86 call interface. It calls a SV86 handler with hooks and returns nothing. The `PSTDREGS` argument is used as input and output, so save the input if it is still needed after execution.

If the stack pointer provided is ZERO (which is certainly invalid on 80x86), a stack will be provided automatically and is garaunteed to be 1024 bytes long. It is VERY important to set ESP to zero if this is desired. Using whatever garbage is in the stack from previous calls with the structure or anything else is likely to cause a fatal error. To not think about this, simply use INIT_V86R to initialize the structure.

The DOS subsystem has its own function for hooking user-level INT calls which should be used for implementing anything that is actually DOS-level

> Floating point operations can at no point be done in a V86 handler. Period.

## V_SV86Call

Sometimes it is necessary to make direct calls to real mode without capturing. Subsequent calls to the INT instruction are not captured either.

This has limited applications. One example is a driver that uses an EMS card as a ramdisk that needs to call the DOS EMS driver.
The implementation of this will lead to execution in either in SV86 real mode or a preemption-off #GP exception handler. T2 is never entered, and therefore, the system can safely detach the V86 hook procedure for the requested INT in a T1 and call V_INTxH.

