# Virtual 8086 Mode

- VOID INTxH(BYTE x, PSTDREGS r)
- VOID RUNxH(BYTE x, PSTDREGS r)
- VOID HOOKxH(BYTE x, HV86 *old_to, HV86 new)

These are the basic services provided by the kernel for controlling requests to the BIOS or DOS from protected mode.

There exist a chain of handlers for each INT call. The chain starts from the very end and approaches the begining. It returns the old handler to chain back, returns `V86_PM_DONE` if handled in full within protected mode, or V86_PM_REFLECT to send it to real mode unconditionally.

The V86 hook handler takes a PSTDREGS structure. The `v86_` prefixed members are to be used.

If reflected, SV86 is entered and preemption is 100% disabled. The only things that will run are the real mode code and the general protection fault handler.

If SV86 makes a further call using INT, it will be handled with the chain, but the SV86 handler is required to check the preemption status.

Anything that tries to acquire a lock when SV86 is active will be dangerous. The context is not T1, but a special SV86 context type.



## Is this truly necessary?

Do nested INTs need to be captured?

Well, the idea was that INT 21H could call INT 13H to access the FS, so yeah.

## What Do I Do

It would be very difficult to make hook code able to handle SV86. Basically nothing is safe to do. Cannot even call the memory manager to allocate a disk buffer.

Why not elevate the current thread? Have it IRET with a callback or maintain a local count?

What I am considering now has the potential to orthogonalize the whole INT/IRET thing.

Threads will need to have a pointer to the DOS context. This context must be exclusively accessed in C.

### A Solution?

There is the concern of how SV86 works if the scheduler is not initialized, since I need it to hav something to run. Not a problem. A thread can still have a DOS context. There will be an initial thread.

One issue might be the fact we are using a local context.
