# Virtual 8086 Mode

> Fourth(?) edition. Updated June 2025.

This document is of interest to developers and describes the use of Virtual 8086 mode.

## Definitions

PCM - Physical conventional memory
VCM - Virtual conventional memory

## Real Mode IRQ

If a valid ISR is not installed in protected mode, the IRQ is considered to be controlled by a legacy driver. It can be reclaimed if that device has a 32-bit driver and proper detection is used.

Legacy drivers run in the original real mode address space. They are called by switching to real mode and calling the correct interrupt vector. A special section of code loaded by the bootloader does all redirection.

## Real mode address spaces

OS/90 was intended to use a single address space and run all DOS programs in the real conventional memory.

OS/90 currently uses multiple address spaces for DOS, which requires a 4K overhead per process but not per thread because they share it.

### Program Segment Prefixes

Plenty of DOS functions need to access the current PSP. This, however, is a challenge because DOS calls run inside the PCM.


## Supervisor V86 (SV86)

SV86 is the ability of OS/90 to enter a context where it is running in V86 but privileged instructions are fully allowed or emulated to allow cals to DOS and the BIOS.

There is no principle of least priviledge, and programs have to be excluded from calling a service deliberately if system integrity is at risk.

A function called EnterV86 is called which takes a pointer to a register dump and enters it in virtual 8086 mode. No other preparation is done by it.

### IRQs

Interrupts are allowed while in SV86, and can still be handled in protected mode. This means a device driver called in SV86 CANNOT depend on an interrupt that is controlled by a PM driver. This should never happen, though.

### Hooking

Extending and reimplementing DOS and BIOS API calls is the structural basis of OS/90. It is based on hooking onto a chain of handlers per interrupt, where the most recently stacked handler is the first to be called.

Each handler has the opportunity to consume the request OR chain to the previous one.

User programs use the INT instruction in a way that causes a fault (because all vectors are ring-0). If the program has a local hook on the vector in the current mode or in real mode if reflecting, that is called at the process level.

Otherwise, the kernel will call SV86.

The handler can tell if the supervisor or user initiated the request by a flag inside the thread context. SV86 only disables preemption if entering V86 and all hooks are exhausted, so preemption is not the correct criteria for checking where the request came from. The appropriate function should be called.

SV86 takes all parameters inside a register dump specified inside the current thread. The header files define macros that act as variables but are reduced by compilers to dereferences sharing a common base address.

> (Rationale) The regdump goes in memory, that memory must be thread-local for reentrancy, threads are the funadmental units of state transfer, it can go in the stack or the structure, both are local. Plus this is easier.

The function used for SV86 is called INTxH. It returns the value of the carry flag as integer equal to zero or one.

Here is a simple example:
```
_ah = 0xE;
_al = 'A';
_bx = 0;
INTxH(USER|0x10);
```

Protected mode apps can call extended interfaces which detect protected mode calls in the SV86 handler and actually recieve segments and offsets which are valid only in PM. Normally, this would go to V86 mode and fail.

The VM flag of EFLAGS is the way to indicate that the context being passed is protected mode.

Sometimes services change the registers of the task, whether handled in SV86 or a capture handler. In this case INTxH_p exists which takes a pointer instead of using the default context. It is used internally.

V86xH is used to execute without regard for captures at all. There are times when this is necessary.

> It is safe to call INTxH_p within a hook handler, but not the regular INTxH. There are reasons why this may be done. It is necessary to use INTxH_p because it allows registers to be saved.

### Handling Nesting

The DOS context, which is part of the local real mode address space, contains a stack to be used for SV86 either for hooks or for reflections. There are APIs that require the stack, such as PnP and others.


