# Memory Manager 4

## Limits

Address space: 2GB

Physical memory: 2GB

Swap: 4GB (theoretical)

Kernel heap: ~1% of physical memory and constant.

## Features

- Single address space
- Uncommitted memory
- Demand paging
- Swap candidacy

## Zone Block Allocator (ZBA)

OS/90 uses zones to allocate memory. A zone is simply a region of data separated into equally-sized blocks which are allocated in a non-contiguous linked group known as a chain. This is used to allocate swap space and physical memory.

There are many advantages to this scheme. It allows for reusing code and is actually better performing because it allows for granularity to be reconfigured.

```
VOID ZBA_CreateZone(PZONED z);
LONG ZBA_Alloc(PZONED z, LONG bytes);
LONG ZBA_Free(PZONED z, LONG chain);
```

The ZONED structure is a "zone descriptor" and keeps certain data. It is always 32 bytes long.
> Chain groups for processes?
```
typedef struct {
	LONG    id; /* "MPAT", "PPAT", etc. */
	LONG    blocks_alloced;
	LONG    blocks_remaining;
	LONG    top;
	BYTE    granularity_pow2;
	LONG    pad[?];
}ZONED,*PZONED;
```

This structure can be accessed directly and is public.

- blocks_alloced: How many blocks have been allocated.
- blocks_remaining: challenge for reader.
- top: The highest block entry
- granularity_pow2: The size of the block. Shift count for value 1. e.g. if 12 granularity is 4K.
- pad: All unused fields are set to all bits ON when zone is created. Do not touch.

### Default Zones

Z0: ISA-addressable extended memory. Must include physical kernel image. 4K granularity.

Z1: Extended memory after ISA memory hole up to about 64M at most. This zone uses page granularity of 16K rather than 4K because systems with it have higher memory use.

Z2: Page granularity is 64K, kind of like Windows NT. Created for systems with a LOT of RAM and encompasses the remaining extended memory.
